>> Well, I'm Sue Castile.
I'm an environmental health
scientist with ATSDR.
ATSDR stands for the
Agency for Toxic Substances
and Disease Registry.
We're actually part of CDC
based in Atlanta, Georgia.
People should be concerned
about elemental mercury
because most people just don't
realize how dangerous it can be
and what serious
health effects it can
have if you're exposed to it.
The more mercury vapor you're
exposed to, the more likely
you are to have a health effect.
And we don't have one
specific number where
we start seeing health effects.
Different people are more
susceptible to mercury toxicity
or the health effects
associated with mercury exposure
than other people.
And the health effects
are more likely to become
more serious the more mercury
vapor you're exposed to,
the higher
concentration of mercury
vapor you're exposed to in air.
And I think one thing that
is important to remember
is that mercury,
elemental mercury,
is toxic primarily through
inhalation exposure.
When people breathe
in mercury vapors,
we start seeing different health
effects at different levels.
They are basically two
different types of exposure
that we see with mercury.
One is an acute
short-term exposure.
And the health effects that
we see in acute short term
exposures, if you're exposed
to a high enough level,
are headaches, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea.
You may have trouble breathing.
You may have chest pains.
You may have inflammation
of your mouth
and your respiratory tract.
But these are all
reversible health effects
unless you're exposed to
very, very high levels
when you're removed from
the source of exposure
and the mercury can
leave your body.
As you know, a lot of
us have dental amalgams
that contain mercury,
and the amalgams
can be as much as 50% mercury.
And research indicates
that anywhere
from four to 19 micrograms
of mercury per day
can leach out of your
amalgams into your body.
If you're exposed to mercury
chronically for a long period
of time, then we start seeing
much more serious health
effects.
And these health
effects would be
damage to the central nervous
system, fatigue, irritability,
being very emotional, memory
loss, shyness, blushing,
tingling, or tremors
in your hands,
tingling and shooting pains
in your feet, anorexia.
You may have gingivitis.
You may have some serious
respiratory problems.
There are just a lot of
really serious health problems
associated with
chronic exposure.
The symptoms of
mercury poisoning
can be caused by so
many other things
that a lot of times, unless
you know there's been a mercury
spill in a house or people have
been occupationally exposed
to mercury, that may
not be what doctors are
looking for when they're
trying to diagnose a person's
problems.
So it is very challenging.
And then the other challenge
is that some people
can have symptoms
of mercury poisoning
at much lower exposures
than other people.
There's just a very
wide variability
among people about
how they will respond
and what kind of symptoms
they will have at
what different levels.
In some cases, if you're
exposed to two chemicals
at the same time, you may
see synergistic or additive
effects.
So the health effects
of the two separately,
when they're
combined, are greater
than you would expect to see.
And again, there are a
lot of variables here.
So what we have to do is
look at the route of exposure
to the two different chemicals.
We have to look at how
long people were exposed
and the concentrations
of chemicals
they were exposed to to
determine whether or not
there is a synergistic
or additive effect.
We know when a
woman is pregnant,
we hope that she's never
exposed to mercury vapors.
And it's a concern
for us, because we
know that it can
pass the placenta
and get into the unborn baby.
And there it could cause
neurological problems
in the unborn baby.
So we recommend
that pregnant women
avoid being around products
that contain elemental mercury
and especially avoid
areas if there's
been a spill or anything,
because it can harm their baby.
It can cause neurological
problems in the unborn baby.